Multiple facets of bacterial transcriptome can be tackled using a
high-throughput sequencing technology called RNA-Seq.  Of the uses of RNA-Seq
ascertaining differentially expressed genes among different biological
conditions has been a focus. To put millions of short reads from RNA-Seq in the
context of differential expression study one needs preprocess the huge data
(Oshlack et al., 2010). We describe this procedure in a nutshell by focusing on
bacterial transcriptome study.  A reference genome with annotated genes is
required unless a de novo assembly of the genome using the short reads is
employed. Annotated genes include any genomic regions along the reference
genome. They are not limited to protein coding genes, but a prior knowledge
about any genomic regions can be used to list regions of biological interest.
Each of the predefined genomic regions is examined to count short reads that are
mapped to the reference genome using a short read alinger such as BWA (Li and
Durbin, 2009), a Burrows wheeler transform algorithm.  After these mapping of
short reads to a reference genome and summarization of the mapped reads based on
predefined genomic regions as a table of counts, a statistical hypothesis
testing for finding differentially expressed genes can be performed on the table
with a R-package such as edgeR (Robinson et al., 2010) or DEseq (Anders and
Huber, 2010).  This prodecure would produce a list of differentially expressed
genes.  Further analyses such as functionaly category enrichment test (Young et
al., 2010) can be pursued.

References
----------
Anders, S. & Huber, W. Differential expression analysis for sequence count data.
Genome Biol, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Mayerhofstraße 1, 69117
Heidelberg, Germany. sanders@fs.tum.de, 2010, 11, R106

Li, H. & Durbin, R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler
transform. Bioinformatics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust
Genome Campus, Cambridge, CB10 1SA, UK., 2009, 25, 1754-1760

Marioni, J. C.; Mason, C. E.; Mane, S. M.; Stephens, M. & Gilad, Y. RNA-seq: an
assessment of technical reproducibility and comparison with gene expression
arrays. Genome Res, Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA., 2008, 18, 1509-1517

Oshlack A, Robinson MD, Young MD. From RNA-seq reads to differential expression
results. Genome Biology. 2010;11:12.

Oshlack, A. & Wakefield, M. J. Transcript length bias in RNA-seq data confounds
systems biology. Biol Direct, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Parkville, Vic, Australia. oshlack@wehi.edu.au, 2009, 4, 14

Robinson, M. D.; McCarthy, D. J. & Smyth, G. K. edgeR: a Bioconductor package
for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data.
Bioinformatics, Cancer Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, 384
Victoria Street, Darlinghurst, NSW 2010, Australia. mrobinson@wehi.edu.au, 2010,
26, 139-140

Robinson, M. D. & Smyth, G. K. Moderated statistical tests for assessing
differences in tag abundance. Bioinformatics, Department of Medical Biology,
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia., 2007, 23, 2881-2887

Young, M. D.; Wakefield, M. J.; Smyth, G. K. & Oshlack, A. Gene ontology
analysis for RNA-seq: accounting for selection bias. Genome Biol, Bioinformatics
Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal
Parade, Parkville 3052, Australia., 2010, 11, R14 

Other issues that could be discussed
------------------------------------

Statistical hypothesis testing on the gene-wise counts:
the testing is based on statistical models including a Poisson model of read
counts (Marioni et al. 2008), and a negative binomial model to account for
variation in replicates (Robinson and Smith, 2007).  

Technical and biological replicates:
Because RNA-Seq is highly reproducible, technical replicates are often
unnecessary. However, biological replicates would allow to account for
biological variation.

Normalization:
We adjust for different total read counts from samples by normalizing RNA-Seq
data (e.g., Robinson and Oshlack, 2010).

Biases due to low counts and lengths:
Because genes with low read counts can lead to biases, we remove genes with low
counts, or below a threshold of counts.  Transcript length (Oshlack and
Wakefield, 2010; Young et al., 2010) should be considered to remove biases;
simple division of read counts by gene lengths does not remove this potential
bias.
