CHAPTER 1 Introduction 

God made the integers, all the rest is the work of man.
Kronecker

This book is concerned with models of event counts. An event count refers to the
number of times an event occurs, for example the number of airline accidents or
earthquakes. An event count is the realization of a nonnegative integer-valued
random variable. A univariate statistical model of event counts usually
specifies a probability distribution of the number of occurrences of the event
known up to some parameters. Estimation and inference in such models are
concerned with the unknown parameters, given the probability distribution and
the count data. Such a specification involves no other variables and the number
of events is assumed to be independently identically distributed ( iid ). Much
early theoretical and applied work on event counts was carried out in the
univariate framework. The main focus of this book, however, is regression
analysis of event counts. The statistical analysis of counts within the
framework of discrete paramet- ric distributions for univariate iid random
variables has a long and rich history (Johnson, Kotz, and Kemp, 1992). The
Poisson distribution was derived as a limiting case of the binomial by Poisson
(1837). Early applications include the classic study of Bortkiewicz (1898) of
the annual number of deaths from being kicked by mules in the Prussian army. A
standard generalization of the Poisson is the negative binomial distribution. It
was derived by Greenwood and Yule (1920), as a consequence of apparent contagion
due to unobserved het- erogeneity, and by Eggenberger and Polya (1923) as a
result of true contagion. The biostatistics literature of the 1930s and 1940s,
although predominantly univariate, refined and brought to the forefront seminal
issues that have since permeated regression analysis of both counts and
durations. The development of the counting process approach unified the
treatment of counts and dura- tions. Much of the vast literature on iid counts,
which addresses issues such as heterogeneity and overdispersion, true versus
apparent contagion, and iden- tifiability of Poisson mixtures, retains its
relevance in the context of count

data regressions. This leads to models such as the negative binomial regression
model. Significant early developments in count models took place in actuarial
sci- ence, biostatistics, and demography. In recent years these models have also
been used extensively in economics, political science, and sociology. The spe-
cial features of data in their respective fields of application have fueled
deve- lopments that have enlarged the scope of these models. An important mile-
stone in the development of count data regression models was the emergence of
the &#8220;generalized linear models,&#8221; of which the Poisson regression is
a spe- cial case, first described by Nelder and Wedderburn (1972) and detailed
in McCullagh and Nelder (1989). Building on these contributions, the papers by
Gourieroux, Monfort, and Trognon (1984a, b), and the work on longitu- dinal or
panel count data models of Hausman, Hall, and Griliches (1984), have also been
very influential in stimulating applied work in the econometric literature.
Regression analysis of counts is motivated by the observation that in many, if
not most, real-life contexts, the iid assumption is too strong. For example, the
mean rate of occurrence of an event may vary from case to case and may depend on
some observable variables. The investigator&#8217;s main interest therefore may
lie in the role of covariates (regressors) that are thought to affect the
parameters of the conditional distribution of events, given the covariates. This
is usually accomplished by a regression model for event count. At the simplest
level we may think of this in the conventional regression framework in which the
dependent variable, y , is restricted to be a nonnegative random variable whose
conditional mean depends on some vector of regressors, x . At a different level
of abstraction, an event may be thought of as the real- ization of a point
process governed by some specified rate of occurrence of the event. The number
of events may be characterized as the total number of such realizations over
some unit of time. The dual of the event count is the inter- arrival time ,
defined as the length of the period between events. Count data regression is
useful in studying the occurrence rate per unit of time conditional on some
covariates. One could instead study the distribution of interarrival times
conditional on covariates. This leads to regression models of waiting times or
durations . The type of data available, cross-sectional, time series, or
longitudinal, will affect the choice of the statistical framework. An obvious
first question is whether &#8220;special&#8221; methods are required to handle
count data or whether the standard Gaussian linear regression may suffice. More
common regression estimators and models, such as the ordinary least squares in
the linear regression model, ignore the restricted support for the dependent
variable. This leads to significant deficiencies unless the mean of the counts
is high, in which case normal approximation and related regression methods may
be satisfactory. The Poisson (log-linear) regression is motivated by the usual
considera- tions for regression analysis but also seeks to preserve and exploit
as much
