the full repertoire of transcripts of an organism on a genome-wide scale
genome-wide RNA profiles of numerous prokaryotes
rRNA depletion methods
Most transcriptome analyses focus on obtaining a snap-shot of the transcriptional profile at a specific time point or evaluating differential expression to various stimuli.
capturing the transcriptional landscape at single time points, or evaluating responses to a specific set of conditions
Genome-wide studies of bacterial gene expression
annotation-independent detection of transcription
improved sensitivity and increased dynamic range
functional genomics experiments
quantitative gene expression studies
saturation of sequence data by abundant transcripts
DNase treatment
random hexamer-primed reverse transcription
second DNA strand synthesis


\section*{Words}

\subsection*{Nouns}

protein encoding mRNAs 

small non-coding regulatory, structural or catalytic RNAs

advantages as well as drawbacks

protocols for the preparation of high quality RNA

the con- struction of the cDNA library

identification and characterization of the transcripts

\subsection*{Verbs}

calls for

reach these goals

unravel genetic expression at the scale of entire genomes.

draw some perspectives regarding technological advances and possible appli-
cations.

the rRNA/tRNA fraction accounts for more than 95% of total cellular RNA

critical for downstream results

forego the design of tiling arrays probes.

streamlines analysis of the results.

discard sequence reads with multiple matching positions

Detecting and quantifying changes in transcript abun- dance between different
conditions

\subsection*{Phrases}



whether the observed differences are signifi- cantly greater than expected by
chance alone.

The overall process of new transcript annotation usually requires substantial
pipeline tuning and/or manual post processing [43,44].

This is particularly true when one wants to build a consensus annotation based
on several experimental data sets of different nature or querying different
physiological conditions. An attractive, even though oversimplified, approach
consists of taking one condition as a reference and to further subdivide the
transcribed regions according to other data sets (which can be of different
types) [40].

As only changes in signal enable transcription start site detection, detection
of internal alternative start sites is not possible unless their activity
produces a significant increase of the expression signal with respect to the
upstream region.

 boundaries of transcripts can be identified as sudden changes in the level of
 expression, 

Importantly, in RNA- seq experiments, investigation of reads repartition showed
that the local nucleotide composition can explain up to 50% of the variability
observed along a given transcribed region [35,36]. When the library preparation
relies on random priming, local sequence context can be partly accounted for by
weighing reads counts according to the hexamer found at the 50-end of each read
[35].

an additional challenge stems from reads

The huge amount of sequences produced (0.5–50 Gb per run, depending on the NGS
technology) prompted the development of high-perform- ance algorithms such as
BWA

Defining and quantifying transcribed regions

As standard library construction methods do not generate strand-specific data,
approaches that rely on the ligation of linkers to the ends of the RNAs
fragments to retain their directionality have been devel- oped [21,22,13] and
implemented [14,15,7,8] with success. The library is analyzed through NGS and
the reads produced are mapped onto the reference genome to reveal the
transcribed regions.

 by reverse tran- scription using random primers or oligo(dT) primers (after
 poly(A) tailing), the RNA (usually after rRNA depletion) is converted into
 cDNA.

The     employed        enzyme, terminator      50 -phosphate-depend- ent
exonuclease, is also used by a new transcriptomics approach developed by Vogel’s
group [13] termed differ- ential RNA-seq (dRNA-seq) which permits
differentiation of primary transcripts with 50-triphosphate ends from pro-
cessed transcripts.
However, while specifically suitable for the identification of small RNAs and of
transcription start sites [13,14,15, dRNA-seq provides only ‘semi-quanti-
tative’ data [13].

The rRNA capture approach using the MICROBExpress Kit (Ambion) has been widely
applied in RNA-seq stu- dies. As it is based on 16S and 23S rRNA specific
capture probes, depletion efficiency of these kits varies between bacterial
species. 

a major challenge in RNA-seq applications is the enrich- ment for all transcript
species other than rRNA and tRNA

sequencing of total RNA samples greatly reduces useful transcript coverage

provide comprehensive identification and quantification of transcripts with an
unprecedented resolution.

lead to breakthroughs in systems biology.

review each step of the analysis from library preparation to the interpretation
of the data, with particular attention paid to the possible sources of
artifacts.

boost metatranscriptomics and evolutionary transcriptomics applications.

determining the transcriptional structure of genes.

quantifying the changing expression level of each transcript under different
conditions over the full dynamic range of cellular RNA expression.
